# WASHCollab


# Abstract

TODO: Get instructions from submission portal

# Keywords

# Proposal full title

Enhancing Global WASH Data Accessibility through Collaborative
Initiatives (washcollab)

# Background and motiviation

## Introduction to the partnership

WASHWeb and openwashdata were connected through one of the lead
statisticians of the Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP), which is the
custodian of global data on Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH)
hosted by the World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF. Sharing common
goals for an improved WASH data ecosystem, WASHWeb and openwashdata
formed a partnership. Both teams met in-person at ETH Zurich in order to
collaboratively submit this funding proposal.

## WASHWeb

WASHWeb is a practice-oriented community for fostering advancements in
water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) data. Through four thematic
working groups, citizens, NGOs, governments, coders, researchers and
publishers enrich WASH data discoverability, usability, and
representation. WASHWeb’s platform exists to accelerate the collective
improvement of the WASH data ecosystem towards the achievement of
universal access to water, sanitation and hygiene. WASHWeb has authored
the ORD WHO/UNICEF JMP R package \[1\].

## openwashdata

openwashdata is a vibrant, global community that applies FAIR (Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) principles to data generated in the
WASH sector. The community focuses on data generated by researchers
without making this a requirement, but due to the nature of openwashdata
being placed within the Global Health Engineering group at ETH Zurich.
More generally, the mission of openwashdata is to empower WASH
professionals to engage with tools and workflows for open data and code,
which is realised through education by the openwashdata academy
providing training in the required competencies.

## Common goals

WASHWeb and openwashdata share a collective vision of enhancing the
accessibility, usability, and representation of WASH data globally. By
leveraging their respective strengths in WASH practice and research, the
partnership aims to maintain existing open-source tools for analysing
key WASH data, develop new tools in collaboration with data providers,
and disseminate its ongoing work through webinars and conference events.
The collaboration strives to democratise access to critical information
by involving smaller organisations and communities in the pursuit of
improved WASH outcomes.

## Problem statement

Despite the wealth of information in the water, sanitation, and hygiene
(WASH) sector, data remains siloed, challenging to access, and
underutilised. Existing datasets from authoritative sources such as the
World Health Organization (WHO) and UNICEF’s Joint Monitoring Programme
(JMP), World Bank, UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation
and Drinking-Water (GLAAS), and the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development (OECD) are not easily reusable for
research. Furthermore, the scattered and disconnected nature of WASH
data ecosystems impedes accountability and hampers collaborative
efforts. WASHWeb and openwashdata aim to address these challenges by
fostering a participatory approach, engaging diverse stakeholders, and
promoting ethical open data and open source principles to make crucial
information more discoverable, representative, and actionable on a
global scale.

# ORD project plan

## WP1: Maintain

### Goal

Work package 1: “Maintain” involves maintaining open source tools for
researchers and product developers who analyse indicators of Sustainable
Development Goal 6: “safe water and sanitation for all”. Specifically,
WP1 will focus on maintaining the Joint Monitoring Programme (JMP)
dataset for wider, more accessible use in the WASH community. Thanks to
the funding the Global Health Engineering group received from the third
call for Contribute projects by the ETH Board, we discovered that
WASHWeb was actively working on tools we intended to develop. Instead of
replicating efforts and creating inefficiencies, we invested in building
a partnership between Global Health Engineering and WASHWeb. As
researchers with experience in research data management, we now actively
contribute to developing the tools to ensure compliance with FAIR data
sharing practices \[2\]. To work productively, we request the support of
WASHWeb developer Nick Dickinson to maintain the technical parts of the
package for increased usability. This will enable us as researchers to
use the data more efficiently for our purposes (e.g. scientific blogs,
teaching material, scientific publications).

### Activities

1.  Update the WHO/UNICEF JMP R data package to represent the latest
    figures published, add functions for automatic updates and testing.
2.  Liaise with JMP on issues identified in their data files to improve
    the (automated) data pipeline and create greater awareness.
3.  Provide helper functions to shape data for better useability by
    researchers.
4.  Update ORD documentation to provide examples on how to load and
    transform the datasets for analysis.

### Aims addressed

Specifically, WP1 addresses two aims of the Contribute projects: We will
be **contributing** by extending the ORD package to be able to shape the
data into (long) formats for better usability by researchers. We are
**curating** by updating and maintaining the data package.

The JMP dataset includes WASH indicators for all countries and therefore
holds a very central role in many WASH analyses. This work is critical
to improve both accessibility and (re)usability. We provide a community
service by coordinating on the **development** of a flexible **ORD
standard** for this specific dataset.

## WP2: Extend

### Goal

Work Package 2: “Extend” builds on the work from WP1 by engaging with
other authoritative data providers of economic data on water and
sanitation in order to produce a new R dataset package to support
practitioners and researchers with their analyses. Reliable economic
data, including disbursements and expenditure are critical for research
on WASH investments. Together with the data from WP1, researchers will
be able to compare investments and economic conditions against outcomes
(actual service levels). Organisation identifiers for financiers, such
as bilateral donors, government bodies, and their receiving
organisations are lacking in these formal datasets. This work package
will add identifiers so that metadata on these organisations, such as
the type of organisation and their geographic location, can be used to
answer more targeted research questions on investments in WASH.

Targeted data providers are:

- UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and
  Drinking-water (GLAAS)\*
- Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Creditor
  Reporting System (OECD-CRS)
- Sanitation and Water for All (SWA)
- International Accountability and Transparency Initiative (IATI)

The openwashdata and WASHWeb teams have worked with and are in contact
with all of these organisations. The final dataset selection will be
based on the level of collaboration of each data provider with our teams
and overall technical feasibility. As a fallback, the public and freely
available GLAAS data will be used. The technical development lead for
the R data packages that are products of this WP2 will be with Nick
Dickinson from WASHWeb, while the Global Health Engineering group will
contribute by providing input on data sharing following FAIR data
sharing practices.

### Activities

1.  Engage with authoritative data providers to determine feasibility
    and level of collaboration to produce an R package for WASH economic
    data.
2.  Develop and publish an R package dataset for at least one of the
    identified authoritative data providers.
3.  Add organisation identifiers in the dataset in collaboration with
    the data provider and a public registry (https://org-id.guide/
    and/or Wikidata). With identifiers, researchers can leverage
    metadata on the type of investors for analysis.
4.  Provide documentation on how to use the economic data.

### Aims addressed

WP2 addresses the first two aims of the Contribute call by
**contributing** new open source tools based on publicly available
information from the most relevant international organisations, to
support wider research capabilities and analyses in WASH research and
practice. Additionally, this data will be **curated** to ensure the data
is better organised with metadata to be able to classify the economic
data for more refined analysis.

## WP3: Disseminate

### Goal

For wide scale use of the open data packages for WASH indicators, it is
key that we promote and disseminate our work to a wider audience. In
Work Package 3: “Disseminate”, we will host a webinar on innovations in
WASH open data practices and use this opportunity to highlight ongoing
progress under WP1 and WP2. Furthermore, the WASHWeb and openwashdata
partnership will host a session at Stockholm World Water Week (SWWW) in
August 2024 on the WASH data ecosystem, in collaboration with
cross-sectoral partners representing research (University of
KwaZulu-Natal, ETH Zurich), government (Government of South Africa),
NGOs (IRCWASH, BASEflow Malawi, DigDeep), the UN (WHO-GLAAS), and the
private sector (WASHNote). This session was accepted through a
competitive application process for the largest, most prestigious water
conference on Thursday, 11th April 2024. Finally, we will engage
interested individuals and organisations to join discussion groups
online, through Matrix.

### Activities

1.  Host a webinar on innovations in WASH open data practices and
    highlight ongoing work under WP1 and WP2.
2.  Host a session at Stockholm World Water Week “Unlocking the hidden
    potential of open WASH data”.
3.  Invite WASHWeb and openwashdata communities and others to join
    discussion groups for all thematic areas (1. Using Data Better, 2.
    Accountability, 3. Systems Strengthening, 4. Social Justice &
    Privacy) and facilitate ongoing conversations (live and in-chat).

### Aims addressed

WP3 addresses the third aim of the Contribute call. We will **provide
community services** through an online webinar (exp. 300 participants)
to disseminate information about our ongoing work and the other work
packages (WP1 and WP2), and we will host a workshop session at the
largest annual water conference in the world (exp. 100 participants in
the session, 15,000 attendees to the conference). Finally, these events
will also engage the authoritative data providers to strengthen their
link to ORD communities.

# Impact

- How sustainable is the proposed project inside the ETH Domain?

This Contribute proposal is our next step towards the long-term
sustainability of the openwashdata community within the ETH Domain. By
collaborating with WASHWeb, an external ETH Domain actor, we will be
able to promote them as an important, centralised partner who could also
collaborate with other institutions within the ETH Domain (e.g., the
Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (Eawag)).
Therefore, the Global Health Engineering group can continue to invest in
developing researcher-focused workflows in the ETH Domain and see these
projects promoted through external actors who are experienced and
respected professionals in the WASH sector—sustainability increases as
we tap into sectors outside the research communities but benefit from
them in return.

- To what extent may an existing or a newly formed community (be able
  to) engage with the ORD practice(s) built-up during the project?

As this Contribute proposal engages with two communities and the
activities all revolve around engagement with community members, we
expect significant take up in the ORD practices built up during the
project. We will see an increased use of highly valuable data in
research, practice, policy-making, and educational material. Due to our
collaborative approach and the established openwashdata community, we
can promote the data package through our numerous (ETH and external)
educational activities. The communities will be able to identify several
points of entry to engage with ORD practices as we grow our suite of
available data and training.

# Work Packages and milestones

The following Table 1 shows a basic gantt chart against the four work
packages, including program activities. Column “Lead” abbreviations: ND
(Nick Dickinson), SA (Scientific Assistant), ML (Merel Laauwen)

Any publications derived from this program will be published as open
access material, following ORD practices and Open Science standards for
computational reproducibility and sharing of data and code under FAIR
principles.

Table 2:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1xMlMepWoq4lTRRP89x8A1A-1Bkqkn7hjslvpJ5XPXU8/edit#gid=0

# Resources (including project costs)

Table 4:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1p77mMyCWZ3r8N73ZjYB_u038cwsdsMWs6rMjDVwBW_c/edit#gid=0

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body">

<div id="ref-nick2024washnote" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">1.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">Nick D. WASHNote/jmpwashdata. 2024
Apr; </span>

</div>

<div id="ref-wilkinson2016fair" class="csl-entry">

<span class="csl-left-margin">2.
</span><span class="csl-right-inline">Wilkinson MD, Dumontier M,
Aalbersberg IjJ, Appleton G, Axton M, Baak A, Blomberg N, Boiten J-W, da
Silva Santos LB, Bourne PE, Bouwman J, Brookes AJ, Clark T, Crosas M,
Dillo I, Dumon O, Edmunds S, Evelo CT, Finkers R, Gonzalez-Beltran A,
Gray AJG, Groth P, Goble C, Grethe JS, Heringa J, ’t Hoen PAC, Hooft R,
Kuhn T, Kok R, Kok J, Lusher SJ, Martone ME, Mons A, Packer AL, Persson
B, Rocca-Serra P, Roos M, van Schaik R, Sansone S-A, Schultes E,
Sengstag T, Slater T, Strawn G, Swertz MA, Thompson M, van der Lei J,
van Mulligen E, Velterop J, Waagmeester A, Wittenburg P, Wolstencroft K,
Zhao J, Mons B. [The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data
management and stewardship](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18).
Scientific Data. 2016 Mar;3(1):160018. </span>

</div>

</div>
